# 1. Custom types

## 1.1. What's the problem? ✍

TBD

## 1.2. Custom type necessity

Let us now return to the Roman representation of numbers. This coding system is well-known. Therefore, I selected it as an example to answer a more generic question of what to do if you need a custom approach in this respect. What to do, we already know. Because assuming that type is an implementation of a selected coding system we have to define a new type if it already doesn't exist. Precisely speaking, we must answer the question of how to do it. By custom approach, I mean that you cannot only reuse existing well-known types offered by your development environment. In other words, consider a situation where none of the existing types can be used due to specific requirements regarding the information representation. In all programming languages I know, this procedure is very similar. Hence, the examples I am using should be easily portable.

## 1.3. int as a starting point

Let's start our investigation from the previous example where we use integer type. Check out the code from a unit tests project if you want to follow. Using F12 or context menu we may open the definition. The first thing that requires explanation is that we have got the definition of the type Int32 but not a type called int as it's in our code. To avoid long discussion, related to the programming language used and focus on generic features instead, you must assume that the int identifier is just an alias of the Int32. The definition is the same and valid. The first important observation is that the type definition uses a construct called struct. Let me only mention that the type definition was recreated by the environment using a reflection mechanism. The reflection mechanism is outside of this course scope, hence, I propose to reuse the same approach to implement the roman coding system using types concept and use this definition for further investigation. The Int32 you should use as-is.

## 1.4. Roman type

In this line of code, I have defined a dedicated type called Roman to represent integer numbers written down using Roman syntax. Using the context menu I can take us to the definition of this type. We can see that it is a structure. Precisely, this type is defined using the struct keyword. But an interesting observation is that this type additionally defines operators, and therefore also defines operations that we can perform on values of this type. Therefore, returning once again to the definition of a type, I need to recall that a type is a set of values, but also a set of operations that can be performed on these values. Further investigation of the definition will cause a deep dive into the language used, so if you are interested to learn the language in more detail, you must continue this analysis as your homework. In any case of questions or doubts, you may post them using the discussion panel of the repository.

## 1.5. Type Definition Methods

I want to continue the discussion focussing on methods that we may use to define new types. From the previous examples, we know that a new type may be defined using an appropriate language construct. Previously we used the struct keyword to create a declaration containing the definition of a new type. From this example, we learn that a new type may be defined applying similar syntax but the class keyword is used instead of the struct. So the next topic to investigate is why we need two keywords to obtain a similar result. It looks that we must deal with two categories of types. Later we will learn more about anonymous, generic, and partial types as methods we may use to define custom types.

## 1.6. Value and reference types

From the previous lesson, we know that the type should be recognized as a set of values and operation against these values. But from time to time you must deal with situations where you need to point out that there is no value at all. It could be achieved by applying different measures. One of them could be a special entity added to the set of regular values. This additional entity cannot be called just a next, new value because it signals no value. This approach is inconsistent, and additionally, it requires changing the original set of values in case you need to derive a new type based on the existing ones. Usually, it is impractical or even impossible. The next option is based on an assumption that the regular value can be accessed only indirectly if exist. In other words, in this case, the variable is only an access point but not the value holder. This relationship is illustrated in the following figure. In the presented case, the variable V content may manifest that the second part of this couple doesn't exist, or alternatively, it is a reference associating a regular value with this variable. This value exists somewhere in memory. For this approach, there is no need to care about the implementation of the reference (sometimes called pointer) and the location of the regular value if any. Because of the role, to signal that the second part containing regular value doesn't exist only one common value expressed as a keyword null could be used for all types. This way we can create two main categories of types that we call value and reference types. We will analyze the features of both categories using the next examples.

## 1.7. Modification of the value types

For illustration purposes, I will use a definition of two types. You may find them in the unit test project. To define the first type, I use the struct construct as previously in the case of the Roman type. To define the second type the class construct is used. By design, both represent point coordinates on the x, y plane, and both have a constructor that allows you to assign initial values. The x and y internal variables are current coordinates values holder. For the structure, I defined additionally two static methods that create the value of the structure type. In one of these methods, I use a local variable that is not initialized using a constructor. Now let's look at the behavior of values that are of type structure. In the first step, I define two variables for which I assign the same coordinates.

## 1.8. Modification of the struct type

Here we have a method - I will use the Alt-F12 key to open its definition. The definition is below in the same file, but it will be more convenient to look at it when it is directly below the program text located in the place where we are analyzing. Here we can see that the parameter is defined as the input. It means that the assigned value is transferred only in one direction - from the callers. Although these instructions modify both variables using pseudo-random numbers the original value doesn't change, and both variables are equal to each other. To be able to modify the value of the structure type, we must use the ref keyword. It causes that the parameter becomes input-output, and the assigned value is transferred in both directions. Let's look at the definitions again. Here, we do the same as previously. The coordinates are modified using random values, but this time the operation is effective because the parameter is input-output, so the modified result is transferred back to the caller. As the result, the values here are not being equal to each other.

## 1.9. Reference Types Comparison

Now this variable is of the class type. First, I can assign to it an initial value of null, which means that this variable has no associated value. In this case, when the variable is of a class type, you have to deal with two values. The first value is assigned directly to the variable, and this is a reference, a kind of pointer. It is worth stressing that the reference in the language is an abstract concept, which means that the implementation details of the reference are hidden. The second part of this value is an object of the declared for the variable type. This object is created using the new keyword. Next, a newly created object is assigned to the second variable, which is the same type. It is initialized to the same coordinates. As the result, of course, the coordinates are equal to each other, but the values ​​of the variables are not. Why? The reason is that these variables have references to different objects and therefore have references pointing out to two different objects. Let me stress, in this case, we don't compare the values ​​of the objects, we do not compare the objects themselves, but in this case, we compare only the references. Therefore, in this case, the usage of the equality comparison operation could be confusing. Again, references are abstract therefore, it is hard to explain what equality means. It is the reason why I compare the references themselves using the AreSame and AreNotSame invariants. In this case, we are answering the question of whether the referenced objects are the same, or precisely if there is only one object referenced by many variables.

## 1.10. Reference Type Modification By Method

In this case, the call to the method that has an input-only parameter is effective. It is because it modifies variables inside an object - the parameter causes indirect access to and modification of the internal state of the referenced object. These assertions prove that the coordinates x and y are not the same, and so we can state that they have been successfully modified. In this case, the method parameter is also a variable that is not the value in concern but only an access point to the value after creation, the objects are initialized to the same values​, but later this method modifies one of them successfully.

## 1.11. Value and Reference types Conclusion

Analyzed examples show how to define a new type belonging to value or reference categories, and suggest conditions we may apply to select an appropriate category. The syntax and semantic of the definitions are similar while the examples show fundamental differences related to the representation of the lack of value and the behavior of the method parameters. The examples don't cover all methods that can be used to define a new type. We will return to enumerations and delegates in the context they are especially useful later during the course.  To continue the discussion about the classes I propose an investigation of the static class concept in the next example and comparison it with the singleton pattern. I believe that you will find this topic especially useful to extend your knowledge and improve understanding related to the type concept.

## 1.12. Static Class

An example illustrating the use of the static class is located in the `StaticClassTest` method. We will not discuss them in detail but there are a few things that need to be underlined. Especially, I will not discuss the issues related to the programming language itself. So if you need detailed information about the syntax of the static class definition you must check out the CSharp guide. What is worth remembering is that the static class cannot be used as the type of variable. As a result, we can state that in fact, the static class is not a type, you cannot instantiate the static class, and you cannot operate on values of that type. So in the sense of type, as a linguistic construct that defines a set of allowable values, a static class cannot be used. On the other hand, a static class can contain variables and these variables can be modified. It may also contain functionality. What it is if it isn't the type because its features don't fulfill the type definition. Because it could contain members  - I mean variables and methods - we can recognize the static class as an organization unit gathering internal definitions and declarations available in the context of the static class name. We will return to the static class features while discussing extension methods.

## 1.13. Singleton Pattern

In the case of the Singleton class, let's move on to the definition of this class - quite an uncomplicated class - again I leave the analysis of this class as homework, here the important issue is that for the Singleton class, for the singleton pattern, we can only create one instance. The proof you may find in the unit test method called SingletonTest. The most important feature is that we cannot directly create an instance of this class because the constructor is hidden and cannot be directly used by the code outside the class - it is private. To get access to this class instance we have to use this static property that returns an existing instance or creates a new one otherwise. Here we can see that if we have two variables for which we assign initial values, then using this assertion method we prove that these references are the same, so they led to the same instance.
