---
//____________________________________________________________________________
//
//  Copyright (C) 2018, Mariusz Postol LODZ POLAND.
//
//  To be in touch join the community at GITTER: https://gitter.im/mpostol/TP
//____________________________________________________________________________
---

# Reflection

## Key words

Attribute, metadata, property info, accessing property, dynamic programming, 

## Subject

How to develop software processing information recovered from the software compiled code (reverse engineering) at run time.

## Goal 

Programming against the types we don't know at design time.

## Scope

- Attributes definition
- Applying attributes
- Recovering attributes
- Discovering and using properties


## See also

### [Reflection \(C#\)](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/programming-guide/concepts/reflection)

> In Microsoft .NET documentation.

Reflection provides objects (of type Type) that describe assemblies, modules and types. You can use reflection to dynamically create an instance of a type, bind the type to an existing object, or get the type from an existing object and invoke its methods or access its fields and properties. If you are using attributes in your code, reflection enables you to access them. For more information, see [Extending Metadata Using Attributes](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/standard/attributes/index).


### [Using Attributes in C#](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/tutorials/attributes)

> In Microsoft .NET documentation.

Attributes provide a way of associating information with code in a declarative way. They can also provide a reusable element that can be applied to a variety of targets.

Consider the `Obsolete` attribute. It can be applied to classes, structs, methods, constructors, and more. It declares that the element is obsolete. It's then up to the C# compiler to look for this attribute, and do some action in response.

In this tutorial, you'll be introduced to how to add attributes to your code, how to create and use your own attributes, and how to use some attributes that are built into .NET Core.

- [Extending Metadata Using Attributes](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/standard/attributes/index)

> In Microsoft .NET documentation.

The common language runtime allows you to add keyword-like descriptive declarations, called attributes, to annotate programming elements such as types, fields, methods, and properties. When you compile your code for the runtime, it is converted into Microsoft intermediate language (MSIL) and placed inside a portable executable (PE) file along with metadata generated by the compiler. Attributes allow you to place extra descriptive information into metadata that can be extracted using runtime reflection services. The compiler creates attributes when you declare instances of special classes that derive from System.Attribute.
